I think more of us need.
Yeah,
Sorry.
Well, good afternoon and welcome to
the Social Services CUNY Select Committee.
Um, thank you very much for coming in.
Um, so gonna give us a briefing this afternoon on the
integrated data infrastructure, which I'm paying for sort
of more, more understanding
and awareness of our parliamentarians
and probably others as well around this.
But look, um, I'll hand it to you to introduce yourselves
and to give an overview, um, into x to take,
I think taking the production
that I think may not be a wide setting, uh, from some
of the, you know, people at the table and, and,
and across New Zealand, actually.
Uh, so you can give us an oversight and then it's,
and then providing how much time I have, you know, questions
for members would be great.
No problem. Oh, well, thank you for the opportunity to,
um, come
and speak about, uh, the value of, uh,
integrated data today.
Uh, my name is Rachel.
I'm one of the deputies, um, at Steps nz
and with me is, uh, Simon Ross, who's our general manager
for data operations and Infrastructure.
So we're going to do a little bit of a TAG team,
if that's okay for you.
So, uh, I'll talk just very briefly about, um, the role
of stats in this context, and then I'll hand to Simon
and he'll talk more about the integrated data
infrastructure itself.
Thank you. So, uh, STAT is hopefully many of you know, uh,
stats NZ collects information, um, uh, about, uh,
people in organizations.
Um, and we use that data to provide insights, uh, statistics
and data about New Zealand.
Uh, we source a wide range of data
that includes administrative data, like, uh, tax, uh,
private sector data from data intermediaries, as well as,
um, from surveying, uh,
the government statistician at Stats NZ holds, uh,
the government, uh, chief data steward role.
Uh, this role supports the use of data
as a resource across government
to help deliver better services, uh, to New Zealanders
within the research landscape.
Stats N Z's role is to ingest
and link the data, provide the infrastructure,
and ensure that the data is kept safe through the safeguards
that surround the IDI.
Within the data system, uh, government agencies,
tertiary sector and research institutions
set sector priorities, um, conduct the research
and implement the findings of the research into, uh,
policy direction, uh,
or service evaluation, um, or improvements.
Stats NZ responds to the needs of the research community
by adding or modifying, uh, new data to the IDI
and that enables or supports the research stats.
NZI also provides supports in terms of access, uh,
to use the IDI stats.
N Z's key piece of legislation is the Data
and Statistics Act, uh, 2022.
The key parts of this legislation include requirements
that researchers in the public interest
and is, uh, carried out by appropriate researchers only
there are strong confidentiality requirements,
so people can be assured their data is safe and protected.
Uh, for example, data cannot be released where it might, uh,
be able to identify an individual.
The government statistician must also publish information
about research access,
and researchers must must publish their results.
So New Zealanders can see the way their data
is managed and used.
Uh, the independence
of the government statistician in this process is a
unique point of difference.
Um, and service delivery agencies, um, uh,
could be conflicted in their hosting
of the data against their service delivery mandate,
whereas Stats NZ can play a more neutral role
in this, uh, context. So I'll hand to Simon.
Uh, thank you Rachel Koto.
Um, so I'm Simon Ross,
and just looking to take the opportunity to reinforce a few
of the key points about the IDI from the
information that we shared in advance.
So the IDI is the government's most
comprehensive research database.
It contains de-identified data about people
and households, contains a range of data, um, about events
and services such as from education, income, benefits,
migration, justice and health.
Um, and it's built from data supplied
by government agencies from stats NZ surveys
and from non-government organizations.
The RDI I is built around a central linking spine.
It's a list that aims to estimate every,
the ever resident population of New Zealand.
So every person who's ever been here is a resident,
and it's made by combining tax, birth and migration records.
Making the data accessible while keeping it safe is an
overriding priority for stats NZ in its
stewardship of the IDI.
So we use the five safes
and the HARRY frameworks to manage safe access to the data.
The IDI is a critical tool for governments
and the wider data system
with many agencies now relying on the IDI
to inform service planning
and delivery, as well as program evaluation.
The IDI is also used by, used widely beyond governments,
including for research within the academic
and tertiary sectors, um, for looking at outcomes
of key population groups
and the factors that affect these outcomes.
The IDI is used by research consultancies
that carry out research on behalf of others
to support them in accessing the insights they need.
And I guess just to a little more on that, um,
if you're a agency or a community group
and you might not have the technical expertise
to gain insights from the IDI, um, it's useful
that these kind of experienced, uh, consultancies are able
to be contracted to provide that expertise
and those insights, just in terms of what the IEI can
and can't do, it can link data from multiple sources over
time, which allows cohorts
to be understood across their lifespan,
can help identify characteristics of groups with positive
and negative outcomes, and can evaluate
how effective service and interventions are, such
as the effectiveness of alternative education services
or teen parent units.
And the effectiveness of the Housing First program,
which is a study done by the University of Otago,
it can also be used to tailor interventions
to people based on characteristics they share
with groups that have been studied.
In terms of things the IDI cannot do, um,
it can't follow individuals who are using services.
So it's not a case management system.
It can't identify specific individuals who are at risk
or would benefit from a specific intervention,
and it can't identify specific individuals
who are abusing systems or take enforcement action.
So the focus of the analysis is at that group level,
not that individual level.
Uh, just in terms of final comments, um, some key pieces
of research that might be relevant to this committee.
Uh, so we've had a study on healthcare accessibility
and aging in white Taha Canterbury.
So the research explores
how residential mobility affects healthcare
for older adults in Canterbury in the West Coast.
The study will assess where the current healthcare
infrastructure meets the needs of an aging
and increasingly diverse population study of child
and adolescent development in New Zealand.
This report aims to consolidate data on child development
and identify areas for early intervention
and a study on neurodegenerative diseases
in former rugby players.
So this study examines health impacts
of playing rugby at various levels,
focusing on neurodegenerative diseases
and former first class male players
also high highlights the innovative uses
of big data in sports health research.
And just one final comment.
Um, stats is not expert in the, you know,
these individual pieces of research
that are done in the IDI.
We need to know enough to evaluate potential projects, uh,
but we do not have the full details
of findings of research projects.
Um, we do seek, however, to ensure that these are published
and publicized for transparency,
and so that their value can be realized. Thank you.
Great, thank you very much. Might kick it off
with a questions.
Um, is there, is there anything equivalent
to this in any other jurisdiction globally?
Or is this reasonably unique?
Uh, I would say New Zealand is recognized as a leader in,
you know, what we've been able to do
with bringing the amount of data together that we have.
There are various other jurisdictions
that have examples of this.
Um, so there are some examples in Australia,
there's a Western Australia data linkage infrastructure.
The, um, the Australian Bureau
of Statistics also has a data linkage program.
There are a couple of examples in Canada,
one in British Columbia and one in Ontario.
Uh, it's been worked on in the UK as well.
I would say we are more advanced than, um,
than England in this space.
But, um, Scotland has an example in the health
space, which is quite advanced.
So there are a number of examples around the world,
but they're not all as comprehensive as the one
that we've been able to build in New Zealand.
And, um, the, you, you need to strike a balance clearly
between, um, data integration and,
and dashboarding that data and also concerns around privacy
and data sovereignty.
How do you balance that?
Uh, so we are really focused on making sure
that the data we bring in is safe,
and we have a number of processes to make sure that is, so
that is begins in talking with the people, um,
who hold the data in the first place to make sure
that they have the rights, uh, permissions
and sort of privacy statements
and things that would allow the data
to be on supplied to us.
We've also got the protections of the Data
and Stats Act, which are important there.
So that covers whether we can bring it in the first place
and all our obligations once we hold it.
Uh, once we've decided that we can bring it in
and we've done privacy and fact assessments
and we've done data sharing agreements that cover that, um,
we then have the protections,
and this is all under the five safes framework
where every piece of research that wants to come in
and access that data set is being scrutinized
to make sure it's in the public interest.
And so the need ticking a pie Harry framework is more
bringing a kind of ethics perspective to it
and an indigenous data perspective.
So I think you'll find there are controls in various areas
and they overlap
and they work together to make sure that both it's safe
to bring the data in and then it's safe
for whatever projects are seeking to use it.
One of the, one of the things I've seen over the,
over the years is, uh, the challenge in,
I guess you might say, um, data dashboarding.
So decision makers can actually understand what's going on
and what, what are the drivers, what are the population
movements, et cetera,
and what that means for policy decisions they need
to make both at a local government level
and a central government level.
Um, how, what work has been done to dashboard that
decision makers across, you know,
so both local and central government?
Well, I guess we are not the ones doing that work,
so we are sort of providing the infrastructure
and making sure it's available to approved projects.
There are multiple different government departments
who are using that data for their various purposes.
So, uh, for instance, um, health as a project.
And so they'll do health research
and they'll link it through to social factors
and they will, um, present that information
for their constituencies.
The social investment agency has quite a significant
dashboarding program where they're bringing data out
of the IDI and they're making it available publicly.
Um, and a lot of that is broken down at a regional level,
so it's quite valuable, uh,
throughout the country from that perspective.
Um, anything else you'd wanna comment on? Yeah,
Well, in terms of our own, uh, statistics
and making them available, uh, we use outputs from, um,
the IDI in that process as well.
What, sorry, could you say that again?
Um, in terms of our own statistical releases
and programs, um, we also use, um,
outputs from the IDI in order to underpin,
uh, that work as well.
So, uh, in terms of dashboarding, um,
it's really those data visualizations
that we have available, um, on our website as well.
So do do local government, um, access this
or use it at all to your knowledge?
So I don't have any examples with me of projects
that are specifically from local government agencies.
So I think that's an area
that we probably haven't explored a lot yet.
Yeah. And what, what are, what are some opportunities, um,
that haven't been sort of fleshed out yet that, that you,
you may see on the, on the horizon that, uh,
could be useful?
Well, I think there's a number of, um, areas
where the government's got social investment priorities
and are increasingly, you know, seeking to develop projects.
So in those areas, um, working with NGOs
to bring in new data and then looking to connect
that NGO data with the data that's already in the IDI
and being able to provide sort of dashboards
and things back to those NGOs, um, that's a real area
of growth and we'd expect, you know,
quite a lot of that to happen over time.
Um, NGO data is a current, there isn't a lot
of NGO data in the IDI at the moment.
And so it's an area where, um, working with the government
and the social investment agency we are looking to grow.
Its over time.
Um, I think, you know, there's 370
or so active projects in the I to I at the moment.
So, you know, lots of people, uh, have over the years,
you know, seen value in the data sets that we've got online
and sort of put together a project and brought it to us,
and we've evaluated that and now they're working away in it.
So, um, there are many projects that are going on right now.
Um, and so as I say, we
scrutinize the projects on their way in
and we are monitoring that they're doing the right things,
but we are not, um, monitoring the content
of those projects and what comes out of them.
Um, so it's really our job to make that data available
and to make sure people are using it safely
and then they take it
and they, uh, develop the insights and then publish it.
Okay. And I, I mean, there's two, I'll go go
to other questions shortly, but, um,
I guess there's two two co cohorts
that immediately come to mind for me.
Um, one, one is, um, young people
and especially those with, with various complexities that
that may make it difficult.
And so really interested in what that data can be used for
and that, so to ensure we get best service delivery to them.
The other, the other is our aging population,
which is quite a significant bulge,
uh, coming from New Zealand.
And, and again, that, that data set
and what we can, you know, how
that can be used actually better informed decision
making going forward.
It is sort of a very broad question,
but I, I, I raised some comments on the usefulness
of the data set for, for those two
Co Yeah, I can.
So, um, just in the older people,
there is a project on expenditure patterns
of retiree households.
So this study analyzes household wealth trends across
demographics and explores how wealth affects life outcomes
and informs debates on retirement policy taxation, uh,
and older age poverty.
Um, just trying to see if we've got an example,
a youth example in here.
We do. Uh, so one example, um, this youth example,
so it has been identified that, uh,
driver licensing
or lack of driver licensing in rural communities
for young people was affecting justice outcomes.
And so identified that rural males, many
of them were entering the justice system
after being caught driving without a license.
And this sort of led to vines and enforcements
and things that could have been averted had there been, um,
you know, driver's licenses able to be had earlier.
And so, uh, program was run to target driver licensing
to support to try and break the cycle.
And so in terms of short term outcomes,
after one to two years, more young men obtaining licenses,
fewer driving offenses, reduced police interactions
in the medium term around five years, improved employment
and education outcomes, lower benefit reliance,
especially in rural areas where
licenses often essential for work.
And in the longer term, over 10 years, fewer crashes,
hospitalizations, and a CC claims fewer justice
and corrections and directions
and reduced pressure on public services.
So, I mean, the two examples I gave,
there are only two examples.
There are many things that people looked at for older people
and for young people in the IEI.
So it's, um, data that's available for people
to bring projects forward, really.
And I'm sorry, I'll get this,
I'll get this, got a couple.
Um, I just thought that we're gonna
Bribe you with this batch, Uh, that, uh, the idea has,
has grown since 1991,
or see, was it seven, um,
to comprise over 500 tables containing
15 billion plus rows of data.
Now we're obviously entering an era
of artificial intelligence.
We've got an ability to analyze data in a way
that's never been able to be done before,
but also you need to ensure that you,
that it stays within that data set.
Mm-hmm. Yes. Um, what opportunities, uh, are available there
that you sort of have seen you?
Is it, is that still no
one's really turned their mind to add?
So the, I is currently run on what we would describe
as reasonably creaky infrastructure.
Um, it is safe and secure, but it is not hugely advanced.
And so I think that limits the ability to bring kind
of modern and advanced AI tooling to bear.
Yeah, I think there are also kind
of important ethical questions about whether this, you know,
rich resource of data about people,
whether it's appropriate to bring those tools in there.
And so they are kind of questions that we haven't dealt with
yet, but we would expect to work through a kind
of ethical framework to do so.
Um, we are working on a business case for improvements
to the IDI for the future.
And so, you know, if we were to advance the infrastructure,
then those questions become really important.
Like is it the right thing to do to bring in, um, AI tools?
But it's something that we haven't explicitly addressed yet.
Okay. I've got now several up.
For me, it's a different question.
Um, but the first one is, um, I'll just pick up
that issue about the ai
and obviously there's the security issues
that are involved in a, a developing technology,
but there's already security issues.
But one of the benefits of this has gotta be the linkage
with other countries, hasn't it?
Because you can expand your pattern recognition
and you can learn more.
What do you do about making sure
that your development is able to work,
um, in a synergistic Yeah.
Way with other countries who are doing similar things so
that you can power up the wisdom that you're getting out
of this, of the information.
Um, so I think there's, uh, probably a couple of points.
So, uh, so we are part of, uh, a wide network, um,
across the international statistical community.
Um, so some of the, uh, uh, studies
and, um, organizations, um, Simon referenced earlier.
So we are all developing, um,
and evolving those things together.
So we do share, uh, practice around, um,
ethics confidentiality,
but also obviously a mindful of, uh,
things like the security settings.
So within, um, our context, um, we meet, uh, a lot
of the government, um, requirements for, um,
protection and security.
Um, uh, yeah, we, we have to meet those,
that's a really important part of, um, keeping,
uh, the data safe.
Uh, we also, uh, uh, regularly audit,
um, uh, our practices as well to make sure that, uh,
we are keeping things safe.
Um, it's very important in terms of, you know,
the social license, the license
to operate from New Zealanders that, you know,
they have confidence in our ability to, um,
source data col, um, collect it, uh, integrate it and,
and keep that safe while still providing the benefits
that I think we've talked about today.
Um, we don't, we haven't got joined up databases
and network of databases across, uh, the world.
Um, but obviously, um, the research
that is made available is available to everybody.
And so there are opportunities, um, obviously
for researchers to link up internationally
and work out, um, what types of studies might, uh,
be valuable in that context as well.
So, um, so are the, is it, would it be fair to say
that you're designing mindful of that kind of, um,
ecosystem that's broader than just New Zealand?
Absolutely. Okay. And can I ask you, this is a sort
of philosophical question
and you might just say it's beyond your scope.
Sure. But it occurs to me that what you are doing might mean
that there's a huge boost in understanding of proactive, um,
policy responses.
So because you are studying those
or you've got that information
that we might see people finally understand
that there is an ambulance at the bottom of the cliff
and then there's proactive money into things
so that they never happen.
Do you see that in what, in the way
that the information's being used that we might see a, um,
confirmation of proactive
policies working?
You just gave the example, I think of the one that was, um,
the driver's license one is one of those, isn't it?
Um, But you are avoiding trouble. Well,
Stats is not really involved Yeah.
In evaluating, you know, all of the different pieces
of research that are being done.
So I think these insights are quite diffusely, um,
perhaps found throughout government.
So, you know, different
projects, find 'em in different places.
Um, one thing we do observe though, is
that sometimes people will go in
and they'll be looking at a specific thing, specific set
of research questions, but there'll be kind
of incidental findings that come out of that
that prove useful in some other areas.
So that is definitely a value of bringing the data together,
um, and allowing these analysis to go on.
So, um, there have been examples of interesting
and useful findings that have not necessarily been the kind
of core reason that that research
was being done in the first place.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Alright,
Thank you.
Um, just a quick question about the data.
So is the data that you make available sold,
or is it provided as a service?
Sorry, sold. Was that the first part of your question?
Yes. Uh, so the data that we bring in, uh, we bring in
with agreements with government agencies and others.
And so we don't buy it nor do we sell it.
We don't sell access to it.
Uh, so we, it's not our data, we don't own it.
We host it on behalf of others and we make it available.
Um, and people need
to meet certain standards to be able to access.
So it's provided as a service? Yes.
It's provided as a service Yes. Under our appropriation.
Right? Sure.
Um, yeah, I think you mentioned someone at the beginning
that you capture data from people
who enter New Zealand, come to New Zealand. Was it?
Uh, so migration is one of the key data sets.
Uh, so when we're trying to, um, define
that ever resident population, um, we've got people
who are born here and people who die here.
So got those records. We've got people
who work here through tax records.
And then for people who come into the country, we're trying
to capture their residency via the crossing of the border.
Okay. So it's not just international travelers
or are you measuring that
As No, so in fact, we're not really trying
to capture people who might have just come here
for two weeks as tourists.
Like that's not the focus of it.
But we do wanna capture people who move to New Zealand.
So that's the value of those migration records, being able
to figure out who those people are and make sure
that they're in that core us.
Uh, um, so just thinking about that from a tourism point
of view, capturing people who are entering,
even if it is temporarily, um, would seem to me
to be a a, a valuable measure to have
or is that easily captured in other data
or through through the entry
Customs? Yeah, so
we, yeah, we provide, um, statistics about, um,
migration flows, people who are obviously coming
to New Zealand, um, and leaving.
And also tourism flows as well. Travelers. Yeah.
Okay. Great. Yeah, thank you Ola. Thank you.
Um, for cheers.
Um, I have a supplementary with Alice's question
and it is more around how robust is the framework,
how often do you audit it
and um, around safeguards we may have
already me, you this Yeah.
Um, and the compliance around it.
So is our legislation fit for purpose
or does it have to be amended over time?
Because given the cyber all over the world, you know,
from a New Zealand, New Zealand Inc.
Perspective. Interesting.
And I just, I'm really interested in the robust framework,
robustness of the framework and, uh, legislation.
Uh, perhaps if we start with the legislation
and then move on to the other frameworks.
So we have the Data
and Stats Act, which was updated in 2022, so
that's a pretty recent piece of legislation.
I think we think it's working pretty well
and offers sort of a good balance of access to data
and protection of data.
So I think we're pretty happy with that.
Uh, we've also had our Privacy Act updated in 2020, so
that's a relevant piece of legislation here.
All the privacy impact assessments we do are
done under that framework.
Uh, so again, it's not, you know, not 2025,
but it work was done on that fairly recently,
Fairly recent.
Um, in terms of the five safes frameworks, so
some my notes on it, but, um, safe people, safe projects,
safe settings, safe data,
Safe outputs, Safe outputs.
Thank you Rachel. Um, so that framework is something
that we've had in place for quite a long period of time,
but exactly what we do under that framework, um, you know,
we're always kinda looking to tighten up, um,
and make sure that we, uh, applying it as best we can, uh,
when it comes to projects that are going on in the IDI
and then also the data labs themselves
where people are accessing the data.
So we audit those data labs once a year to make sure
that the physical security is right
and also that the IT security is right.
And then we have scrutiny of the projects both
before they're approved to make sure
that they're set up in the right way.
And also as they go on, uh, researchers come on
and off them, but we need to make sure
that they are doing the things that they've said, uh,
in the applications of those projects, not going off piece
and doing other things with the data.
So I think all of those things coming together,
like we have a good level of scrutiny, uh, on the sort
of cyber security side of things.
So I think the IDI sits within STAT mz, which needs
to have cybersecurity across all
of everything our operations.
And so we are applying that at the edge of the organization.
And then, so the IDI benefits from that.
Um, but it's the type of thing where that security,
you know, always a focus trying to make sure
that it is up to scratch.
'cause you need to do more over time rather than less. Yeah.
Thank you. And just a really tiny set around threats
and risks in the cyber space,
and I'm sort of more looking overseas rather than here.
'cause it sounds like you've got a really robust framework.
How sort of, are there, I mean, how does that work?
Do you get a like flag or how are you advised or?
So neither of us are sort of chief technology officer
or kind of our security people.
So we have people in the organization who are responsible
for monitoring those threats, I guess I would say.
And yeah. Yeah, it's at all of organization level. Yeah.
And we can certainly provide the committee with, um,
more information about how we do, uh, go about those things.
Um, so more than happy to do
That. It
in here that the data labs aren't connected
to the internet though.
No. So that's gotta be a big help.
Yeah, that's an important thing.
So, you know, sequestered off, it's
where you can access this data specifically
and you can't access all that data
that's talent needs from the same place.
Um, which I've just given myself a sub segue into a sub.
Um, so because they're not connected to the data,
labs aren't connected to the internet,
how do you physically get the information out of there to,
to customers or people who are requesting the information?
Uh, well I guess there are connections from the data labs
to the databases themselves, so people can do the research.
Uh, and so we have what we call output checking.
So researchers are required to make the data confidentially,
um, in order for it to be outputted.
And so that's their responsibility as researchers.
Uh, we then have a team in stats who does output checking.
So they go in and they look at the outputs the researchers
have created, and then make sure that all
of our rules are being applied and no one could be
identified from that data if it was to come out of the lab.
And then it's our team who takes the data outta the lab
and makes it available to the researchers outside the lab.
So that's how that process works.
So how do you get it out if it's not connected to the,
Uh, so within our infrastructure in stats nz,
they're able to take those files
and then make those available to researchers.
So, um, they are, I believe they're emailed
to researchers once our staff take them out of the data
Lab. So the co
the they create a copy that's removed.
Yeah, that's right. Yeah. Yeah.
Cool. Um, thanks Mr. Chair. Thank you for coming in today.
Um, I'm keen to know a little bit more about, um,
tikanga Maori principles being applied to the data
and, um, Maori practices across it.
Um, are you able to explain to me how
it's relevant for governance?
I understand the sharing of data with interest groups,
it could be really interesting, um, but the data is data.
So I'm keen to know your,
how this is applied in practice
and what your thoughts are about this.
So the NAI framework is the primary way
that we provide, um, that we,
that te Maori principles are applied to
how the data is used.
And so we, it's an ethical framework from our perspective,
and it's been developed, uh, gifted to stats NZ by, um,
by a Maori researcher originally.
Um, and so that is the mechanism, um, by which,
um, Maori principles are applied.
So, um, I actually don't have the information in front
of me about the content of that
framework, but it is published.
Um, and so we're more than happy to share the details
of how that framework works
With you. Yeah, yeah.
I think, I think in practice, um, if we know
that for example, if we know that a research project, um,
is going to focus on a particular community, what
that framework helps do is um, uh, ask questions about
who's on the research team, do you have the right expertise
to be working alongside, um, those communities?
Um, and then also I think in terms of the outputs,
have you thought about, um,
how those out outputs will be presented and um,
and analyzed and those sorts of things?
So, uh, yeah, it's a set of questions
that are really helpful for, um, researchers, um,
particularly if they're new to the space as well,
and they just needed additional support to work effectively
with, um, with different communities.
Okay. And yeah, possible we,
could we grab a copy of that framework
Absolutely. Point we can provide
That, absolutely. Share
it. Now, just earlier you mentioned
that the infrastructure that this runs is quite freaky.
Um, what can you go, are you able
to give a similar indication of what that means and,
and if there is an opportunity to update
that given the technologies that are available now with,
without compromise the integrity
of the data sets that you hold?
Yeah, I think it's two things.
It's the, um, the infrastructure itself,
like the IT infrastructure, um, needs an upgrade,
but it's also the way that we do the data processing.
So, um, you'll appreciate starting from the beginning,
the IDI was quite small, it's grown significantly over time,
but the kind of architecture
and the design of it hasn't changed.
And so what happens is three times a year we refresh it
and we, um, receive resupply
of the data from everybody each time,
and we completely reload that data.
And so, um, as it grows and it grows and it grows,
and I think it's 1,073 gigabytes
and 16 million rows in terms of the total volumes
and things that are there now, it becomes increasingly
difficult to kind of run that model.
And so, yeah, it's not just the technology itself,
it's definitely the data processing
and the way that that works.
And so we would like to change the way
that data is processed, um, so
that we could just incrementally update.
So that just means that we're only updating new records.
Everything that hasn't changed, we don't change.
And so that would allow us
to update the data much more frequently.
Um, and so that's a kind
of business case that we are working on.
Alright. Yeah. Okay.
Um, so, um, a note from,
um, the list.
We've got the data in the, the IIPI, um,
only a couple, two or three that reach back to the eighties.
Is there any intention of, of any way, any way
of capturing data prior to the two thousands?
So mostly that reflects, um,
when these data sets collected by the government agencies
that collect them were sort of
collected in digital form in the first place.
So prior to that, everything
that was in here either didn't exist
or it was paper records.
And so there isn't really any ability to go back
and capture the records that were on paper prior to this.
So we are limited by, um, you know, the technology
that was in existence for the record keeping Yeah. At
That time. So there's no intention of
going back
and digitizing that historic information. C
Certainly not by us,
but it may be, uh, it may be something that, um,
the individual agencies, um, uh, have in their plans
and obviously if they were to do that, then
that would potentially make more data available for the IDI.
Yeah,
I've, I've got a question just sort
of from a personal experience
and running how that data set may or may not exist.
Um, having, having worked in the criminal justice sector
for about 10 years Sure.
I I know that, uh, there's a very high incidence
of neurodiversity, uh,
and other complexities in the people
who end up in the court system and the prison system.
Um, in fact it can,
but up to 70% of people have neurodiversity
or having dyslexia, for example.
Yeah. But dyslexia I think is also some
of the most successful business people.
Um, so, so the, well, there's, there's an issue in
that schools may not capture that data at all.
Um, but those that do, I'm wondering how much of that might,
might be in your data sets that, that there's some work
that can be done to sort of surface that more accurately or,
or, or, or not if it doesn't exist.
So I don't believe we have neurodiversity data from
education at this point.
I kind of agree with you. It is possible
that school systems will be increasingly capturing it.
Um, obviously there are neurodiversity diagnoses made in the
health sector as well, so a lot
of those will be made privately or in primary care.
So definitely a gap in the health data that we have is
that we don't have primary care data, um, available to us.
And that's actually a gap for the government overall.
It's not just a gap for us here at Stats
and the IDI, so I would say
I believe health has an intention to come fill
that gap over time, but that is probably the most likely way
that we would systematically get
neurodiversity type information.
I don't know if they're also capturing it in the justice
system, you know, where they are seeing people in,
people are evaluated, um, in that context.
But I would say it's a kind of a, it's a health gap
that we have at the moment, um,
that we would need the health sector to have a way
of bringing it together for us to then benefit
and have it in the start set.
And how, how might that happen?
Like, who would take the leadership on, on saying, okay, we,
we, we think it would be useful to be capturing that data
or, or to be that data in the yada.
So I know that within the health system,
they are interested in bringing significantly more primary
care data together for kind of health planning purposes.
And so I think if they were successful in that endeavor,
then we would be able to tap into it, you know,
through our usual processes, um, to bring it into the IDI.
So I think it's within that health portfolio,
how much progress are they making on that plan?
Questions actually quite related.
I'm interested in new sets
that you might think would be a good idea to capture.
And I can see I, uh, like a, a set
that wouldn't be obvious is actually, um,
employment contracts because it's private information,
but actually what we need to see is the patterns in it.
We don't care about the individual agreements.
And I just wondered what your process was for
choosing those data sets.
Is it opportunity?
Is it, how does that happen
and how much potential do you think there is
in terms of new sets of information
that are you already aware of gaps or opportunities?
Yeah, I think we are aware of gaps, so we're aware
of gaps in an IDI context
and then we're aware of gaps in a kind of more
of a government data system context.
Yeah. Do you wanna comment at all on government data system?
So, uh, so, um, at least a couple of years ago, um,
a data investment plan, um, was put together.
So that was certainly trying to have a look at, um,
more systematically what were the gaps across, um,
across government in, um, social economic
and environmental domains.
Um, so some of that would be relevant to, uh,
finding new data, um, that could go into the IDI as much as
actually we need these data sets
to produce more statistical, you know,
aggregated statistical information, um, as well.
So that's one of the mechanisms by which, um, you know,
we have a, a view of the overall landscape, um,
within the context of our new legislation.
Um, we are starting to work on a multi-year data
and statistics plan.
Um, that's, that's a requirement.
Um, so that will, um, follow on obviously from
that initial data investment plan work.
Um, and I think subsequent
or in, in that same context, we have a range of different,
uh, like we have the information group, so
that's a cross government group where, um,
different data leaders come together, um,
to obviously share practice,
but also to discuss where are the gaps,
what help do people need, um, and those sorts of things.
So that are probably the two key ways that we think about
what those gaps are and, um,
and what might be needed, um, to be filled in future
And directly in the IDI context when it comes to gaps
and potential new data.
Um, so we've got a lot of researchers working in here
and sometimes they'll say, you know, this data set
that we would like to be able to use doesn't exist in here.
And so we talk to 'em about what that might be.
Sometimes they know where that data exists, and so we can go
and talk to that organization.
Sometimes they might not know that,
and we have to see if we can figure that out.
Um, some of the fundamental questions then are, you know,
does that data exist in the form that they want?
And if it does, is it already held by government?
It may, it may not be.
Um, it may exist
and be held by either a organization within a sector
or privately.
And so it's whether or not we're able to access that data
and then sometimes data that people would like to be able
to use in research, um, you know,
is not systematically collected at all.
And so then it's a question of is there enough value in
that data for it to be collected in the future,
which is the kind of data investment plan lens on it.
Um, so I would say
researcher requests definitely drive a lot of our activity
to try and go out and find new data.
And so the more researchers that are clamoring
for a particular data set, the more effort we would then put
into trying to find that data and negotiate
with whoever might hold that data to bring it in.
So we do have a kind of a, a process for trying
to bring new data in on an ongoing basis
and in a way of prioritizing that.
Yeah. Okay. I, there's a supplement actually is, um, so a,
a very, uh, local example, it's of interest
to me is in Queensland Lake District where the, uh,
physics New Zealand data set that is then to inform sort
of population projections have
consistently been undercooked.
Um, it's just been
a challenge that's been there for decades.
Mm-hmm. Uh, local government, um,
has arguably better data sets in terms of
that but's still arguably not good enough.
Um, yeah, because it's, it's very challenging to,
to virtually map what the, what the growth profile will be.
But that has direct implications for decisions around, um,
uh, early childhood, uh, development, primary school,
secondary school roading, uh, you know,
electricity infrastructure, you know, the list goes on.
Um, so, so actually having a good data set is really
important, but more than that is, it's also making sure
that data set is available to the different organizations
who often have their own, um, uh,
projections that they're relying on.
And I, and I think I understand there should be some
reliance on statistics New Zealand,
but when you have a, that, that challenge, so,
so I guess the question is, are you able to, A,
use the local governments data sets?
B is, is there scope to actually have, um,
a more robust data sets that are in real time
that can be used to help inform those planning decisions
that need to be made across multiple domains?
I think your question is probably more about the
production of statistics at that kind of sub-national level.
Like how much do we understand local
and regional communities more than it is about data
that we would seek to bring into the IDI, I mean,
I completely agree that that sort of data is needed
For decisions that you were absolutely laying out there.
Um, I'm sort of wondering whether with the, the information
that's an integrated data set, uh, if there is scope
to have a, have a more comprehensive, um, data set that's,
that's available at that integrated level. So
We do have help inform decision making.
Yeah. So we do have, um, so based on, um, data in the IDI,
um, we've been producing annually, um,
an administrative data population, um, set of statistics,
um, they've been experimental in the sense
that obviously we're still working on the methods, um,
but that, uh, that data set is available annually, um,
and give some insight, not the full insight
that you would get every five years from the census,
but, um, but that's been an addition, um, of a sort
of more integrated set that's been made available in terms
of, um, population change.
Um, and I think in terms of the shift in the census model,
um, one of the, the benefits from moving, um,
away from counting every five years is that, you know,
we'll have annual census information available, um,
in detail, which means that we have, uh,
earlier insight into some of those population changes,
but equally it can be integrated more regularly in
with the data that we already have to help, I think,
provide some of the insights that you may be looking,
um, looking for.
So, um, that's, that's certainly part of our future work.
And just a little bit on that.
So just think about sort
of the vulnerable populations across New Zealand.
Yes. Uh, both, um, vulnerable
because of isolation geographically, uh,
but also say, you know, um,
living in garages, uh, absolutely.
Et cetera. Yeah. Uh, how, how, how much
confidence, uh, sort of can you have at this point,
and in, in terms of the data collection that's happening,
that, that comes in this data set relied on decision makers
in terms of policies, decision making?
Uh, so we probably have some other people
who can speak more, um, in depth about, um,
about homelessness.
What I can say is, so from the 2023 census work that we did,
um, we recognize, obviously we in our collection, um, try
to engage, um, uh, and capture, um, homeless homelessness.
Um, but we also work with a range
of different organizations, um, who, uh,
are more who work with, um, those populations,
those vulnerable people, um, more often every day.
And so, um, through our collective efforts, um, we were able
to, um, subsequently provide, um, an estimate of the, um,
of the amount of homelessness, um, in New Zealand, um,
in terms of our, our work, um, since census
that's really been with, um, housing
and urban development, um,
and other agencies working on, um, how best to
provide, um, estimates of homelessness, um, outside
of the census, um, uh, collection that we've,
we've done in 2023.
Um, but if you want more information about, um,
how we are working in that, um, uh, how are we going
to capture, uh, vulnerable populations, um, we've got people
who, um, could talk to the committee
or provide information thanks.
And that, would that be the same for these, uh, sort of
isolated rural communities or, and sort of households
and sort of, that may not be, you know,
particularly digitally connected, um, but,
and both, both individually,
but also sort of at a, at a governance level,
I think, um, it, it really do, um,
it's somewhat dependent on, um,
how different people interact with, you know, government,
uh, administrative data, how they,
how they show up in administrative data.
So, um, uh, so we do, we do capture a range of, um,
um, cross-section of populations within our, um, uh,
within the administrative data
that obviously feeds into the IDI,
but then also underpins our, um,
popul our broader population estimates.
So, um, it can vary depending on, um, location
and, um,
and different attributes that people have,
um, as individuals too.
Thanks la Yeah, just very quickly through the chair.
Thank you. Um, just in terms of the switch
little from an annual to versus the current model,
um, the insights you talked about,
how variable are those in different, different regions,
different, um, parts of the population?
Um, yeah.
And do you, and, and just following on from that,
is the comparative analysis collecting it
as a one year versus the five year?
Um, so as I said, we, we probably have some people
who can speak far more in depth to, um, yeah,
to our population statistics, but,
but certainly in the context of the IDI, um, being a,
having more regular data available means
that it can go into the IDI and be integrated
and provide insights that you wouldn't
otherwise get if you had to wait every five years.
That's probably the key point. Yeah.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, just thinking about how you collect
that data from other providers, does the
software hardware make a difference?
Like, is it easily imported into your system
or do you have to manually reenter it
So we don't manually reenter it?
No. So, um, I guess they collect it in their systems.
We work with them to figure out a way
that they can output it in a file that can be sent to us,
and then that file is brought into our systems.
Um, we have secure transfer mechanisms, um, to make sure
that, you know, when it goes from their organization
to ours, it does so safely and can't be intercepted.
But there's a lot of work in what we call data brokering,
which is working with those organizations,
understanding their systems, understanding the data,
understanding the quality of the data
before it comes into our system.
So it's a key part of what we do, trying to figure that out.
Right. 'cause I understand too from the health sector,
especially primary health, is
that GP practices have different software programs
that they use and they don't talk to each other.
Yes. So it makes it difficult to collate that information.
That's right. So I was just wondering if that was a,
you know, applied across different other agencies.
I think it's a effective, for us, it's definitely
effective for what I was talking about earlier about,
you know, is health able to bring
that primary care data together.
So we just work with what organizations have, um,
and hopefully they're applying standards,
and if they are, that's great and it makes it easier for us,
but we, if the data is a high priority, we just work
with them to be able to get it into our systems.
Great. And can you just, um, tell us a little bit about
what the longitudinal business database is?
Oh, the longitudinal business database? Yeah.
So, um, so it's, uh, it brings together, uh,
a lot of our economic and business data, um,
and longitudinal as in, um, shows time series over time.
Um, it's an integrated database, so, um, yeah,
brings those all together
and is available for, uh, people to do economic research.
So some of the work
that gets done in the longitudinal business
database studies on, um, productivity, uh,
aspects of innovation, um, those sorts of things.
So yeah, uh, providing, uh, insights for, uh, policy,
economic, um, policy, competition,
policy, those sorts of things.
And, and what, uh, what does data, that data back
to when, when did it begin?
And, um, and so what sources
of data are you drawing that from?
I don't have that information with me. Yeah.
Um, I would say often the data dates back 15
or 20 years, but not in all cases.
Yeah, we have that information. Yeah.
So we can, yeah, we can provide you,
so we've got a similar picture to the one with the IDI,
which outlines all of the data sets
and how far they go back.
They're a mixture of data, data from Statistic New Zealand,
but they're also, um, a range of, uh,
other government departments as well. Yeah.
So I can make mine start just if you had something like
that, that the database
and there were bits of that information
that weren't present.
So for example, I'm thinking about restraints of trade,
which are covered in the private agreements,
but in fact there's a public interest in what would happen,
how would someone say,
actually we are missing this information legislature.
We really need to change the law so
that we can gather this data for our public interest.
How would that occur? Would it be you as an agency
that said, we've seen this gap,
or would it be the people involved in the research,
or would it be both?
Mm-hmm. Is there a mechanism to tell us that we need
to include in our legislation new requests
for information when that's appropriate?
Um, so I think one of the mechanisms, um, for us
as a department, uh, is we, as I said, like we have regular,
um, we, we have a forum where we get together, um,
with other people from other departments.
And so through that we are aware of different legislation
that's being developed.
And so, um, our role in that is, is to have a look at,
so what are the opportunities?
Yeah, so we'll, we provide, um, comments on cabinet papers
and, and uh, legislation so that, you know, this side of,
um, uh, yeah, this side of, uh, what we do.
Um, yeah, it does recognize the,
the data opportunities, um, within it.
Um, yeah. And, and obviously ministers can make choices
about whether they include that or not.
Thank you very much problem.
Thank very much. It's been
very interesting. Appreciate you coming in.
No worries. Thank you. Thank Terms
of next steps might just park back next week.
Thank, um, just the one other item of business news use
for release you, um, just a.